12. Rapunzel
Once upon a time there was a man and a woman who had long wished in vain for a child. Finally the woman began to hope that God would grant her wish.
The people had a small window in the back of their house, from which one could see into a magnificent garden full of the most beautiful flowers and herbs;
But it was surrounded by a high wall, and no one dared to go inside, because it belonged to a sorceress who had great power and was feared by all the world.
One day the woman stood at this window and looked down into the garden, and there she saw a bed planted with the most beautiful rampion, and it looked so fresh and green that she became lustful and felt the greatest desire to eat some of the rampion.
The desire increased every day, and as she knew that she could not get any of it, she fell completely flat, looking pale and miserable.
Then the man was frightened and asked: "What is the matter with you, dear wife?" "Ah," she answered, "if I don't get some rampion to eat from the garden behind our house, I shall die." The man who loved her thought: "Before you let your wife die, get her some rampion, no matter what it costs." So at dusk he climbed over the wall into the enchantress's garden, quickly picked a handful of rampion and brought it to his wife.
She immediately made a salad out of it and ate it with great greed.
But they tasted so good, so good, that she wanted them three times as much the next day.
If she was to have peace, the man had to go out into the garden again.
So he went down again at dusk, but when he had climbed down the wall he was terribly frightened, for he saw the sorceress standing before him.
"How dare you," she said with an angry look, "climb into my garden and steal my rampion like a thief? That will end badly for you." "Ah," he answered, "let mercy prevail over justice, I only decided to do it out of necessity. My wife saw your rampion from the window and has such a great desire for it that she would die if she did not get to eat some." Then the enchantress calmed down in her anger and said to him, "If it is as you say, I will allow you to take as much rampion with you as you like, but I make one condition: you must give me the child that your wife will give birth to.
He shall be well, and I will look after him like a mother." In his fear the man agreed to everything, and when the woman was in labor the enchantress appeared at once, gave the child the name Rapunzel, and took it away with her.
Rapunzel became the most beautiful child under the sun.
When she was twelve years old, the sorceress locked her in a tower in a forest that had neither stairs nor door, only a small window at the very top.
When the sorceress wanted to go in, she stood below and called:
»Rapunzel, Rapunzel,
let down your hair for me«
Rapunzel had long, magnificent hair, as fine as spun gold.
Whenever she heard the voice of the sorceress, she untied her braids, wound them around a window hook, and then her hair fell down twenty yards, and the sorceress climbed up with it.
After a few years it happened that the king's son rode through the forest and passed by the tower.
Then he heard a song that was so lovely that he stopped and listened.
That was Rapunzel, who in her loneliness passed the time by letting her sweet voice ring out.
The prince wanted to climb up to her and looked for a door in the tower, but there was none to be found.
He rode home, but the song had touched his heart so much that every day he went out into the forest and listened.
Once, as he was standing behind a tree, he saw a sorceress approaching and heard her calling up:
»Rapunzel, Rapunzel,
let down your hair«
Then Rapunzel let down her braids and the sorceress climbed up to her.
"If that is the ladder that leads up, then I will try my luck too." And the next day, when it began to get dark, he went to the tower and called
»Rapunzel, Rapunzel,
let down your hair«
Immediately the hair fell down and the prince climbed up.
At first Rapunzel was terribly frightened when a man came in to her such as her eyes had never seen before, but the prince began to speak to her very kindly and told her that his heart had been so moved by her singing that it gave him no peace, and he had had to see her himself.
Then Rapunzel lost her fear, and when he asked her if she would take him as her husband, and she saw that he was young and handsome, she thought, "He will love me more than old Mrs. Gothel," and said yes, and laid her hand in his hand.
She said, "I would like to go with you, but I do not know how to get down.
When you come, bring a strand of silk with you each time, and I will weave a ladder out of it, and when it is ready, I will climb down and you can take me on your horse.' They agreed that he should come to her every evening until then, for the old woman came during the day.
The sorceress noticed nothing of it until one day Rapunzel began and said to her: "Tell me, Mrs. Gothel, how is it that it is much harder for me to pull her up than the young prince, who will be with me in an instant." "Ah, you wicked child," cried the sorceress, "what must I hear from you? I thought I had separated you from the whole world, and yet you have deceived me!" In her anger she grabbed Rapunzel's beautiful hair, wrapped it around her left hand a couple of times, grabbed a pair of scissors with her right, and snip, snap, it was cut off, and the beautiful tresses lay on the ground.
And she was so merciless that she took poor Rapunzel to a desert where she had to live in great misery and suffering.
But on the same day that she had cast out Rapunzel, in the evening the enchantress fastened the cut braids to the window hook, and when the prince came and called:
»Rapunzel, Rapunzel,
let down your hair«
so she let her hair down.
The prince climbed up, but he did not find his beloved Rapunzel at the top, but the sorceress, who looked at him with evil and poisonous eyes.
"Aha," she cried scornfully, "you want to fetch your darling, but the beautiful bird is no longer sitting in the nest and no longer sings; the cat has taken it and is going to scratch out your eyes too.
Rapunzel is lost to you, you will never see her again." The prince was beside himself with pain, and in despair he jumped down from the tower;
He escaped alive, but the thorns into which he fell pierced his eyes.
So he wandered blindly through the forest, eating nothing but roots and berries, and doing nothing but moaning and crying over the loss of his beloved wife.
So he wandered around in misery for several years and finally ended up in the desert, where Rapunzel lived miserably with the twins she had given birth to, a boy and a girl.
He heard a voice, and it seemed so familiar to him: so he went towards it, and as he came near, Rapunzel recognized him and fell on his neck and wept.
But two of her tears moistened his eyes, and they became clear again, and he could see as usual.
He led them into his kingdom, where he was received with joy, and they lived happily and contentedly for a long time.
