84. Hans gets married
Once upon a time there was a young farmer named Hans, whose cousin wanted to find him a rich wife.
So he put Hans behind the stove and had it heated up well.
Then he fetched a pot of milk and a good amount of white bread, gave him a newly minted shiny heller in his hand and said: "Hans, hold on to this heller and put the crumb of white bread in the milk, and stay there and don't move from this spot until I come back." "Yes," said Hans, "I will do all that." Then the recruiter put on a pair of old, tattered trousers, went to the other village to a rich farmer's daughter and said: "Wouldn't you like to marry my cousin Hans? You'll get a brave and clever man who will please you." The stingy father asked: "How is his fortune? Does he have anything to bring in?" "Dear friend," answered the recruiter, "my young cousin is sitting warmly, has a good nice penny in his hand and has plenty to bring in.
Nor should he have fewer slacks (as the goods were called) than I," and he slapped his slack-stitched trousers.
"If you will take the trouble to go with me, you will be shown in an instant that everything is as I say." The miser did not want to let the good opportunity pass and said: "If that is the case, then I have nothing against the marriage."
Now the wedding was celebrated on the appointed day, and when the young wife wanted to go out into the field and see the bridegroom's goods, Hans first took off his Sunday dress and put on his tattered smock and said, "I could spoil this good dress." So they went into the field together, and wherever the vine was visible on the path, or fields and meadows were divided off, Hans pointed with his finger and then struck a large or small patch on his smock and said, "That patch is mine and so is that one, my darling, just look at it," and wanted to say that the wife should not gape at the wide field, but look at his dress, which was his own.
»Were you at the wedding?« »Yes, I was there, and in full dress.
My headdress was made of snow, then the sun came and melted it;
My garment was of spider's web; and I passed through thorns, which tore it off.
