107. The Two Wanderers
Mountain and valley do not meet, but human children do, especially good and evil.
This is how a shoemaker and a tailor once met while traveling.
The tailor was a small, handsome guy and was always funny and in a good mood.
He saw the shoemaker coming from the other side, and as he noticed from his leather bag what kind of trade he did, he called out a mocking song to him:
»Sew me the seam,
pull the wire,
paint him right and left with pitch,
hit, hit me firmly the purpose«
But the shoemaker could not bear any joke; he pulled a face as if he had drunk vinegar and made as if he were going to grab the little tailor by the collar.
But the little fellow began to laugh, handed him his bottle and said: "I don't mean it in a bad way, just drink once and swallow the bile." The shoemaker took a huge gulp and the storm on his face began to clear.
He gave the bottle back to the tailor and said: "I have given her a good drink; one may say this from drinking a lot, but not from being very thirsty.
Shall we go on a journey together?' 'It is all right with me,' answered the tailor, 'if you only feel like going to a big town where there is no lack of work.' 'That is exactly where I wanted to go,' answered the shoemaker, 'there is nothing to be earned in a small village, and in the country people prefer to go barefoot.' So they went on together, always putting one foot in front of the other like weasels in the snow.
They both had enough time, but little to bite and break.
When they came to a town, they went about and greeted the tradesmen, and because the little tailor looked so fresh and cheerful and had such pretty red cheeks, everyone was happy to give him a present, and if luck was good, the master's daughter would even give him a kiss at the door on the way.
Whenever he met the shoemaker again, he always had more in his bundle.
The grumpy shoemaker pulled a wry face and said: "The bigger the rogue, the greater the luck." But the tailor started to laugh and sing and shared everything he got with his friend.
If a few pennies rang in his pocket, he would order them, bang on the table in joy so that the glasses danced, and he would say: "Easily earned and easily wasted."
After they had walked for some time, they came to a large forest through which the road to the royal city led.
There were two footpaths leading through it, one of which was seven days long, the other only two days, but none of them knew which was the shorter way.
The two travelers sat down under an oak tree and discussed how they should prepare themselves and how many days' bread they wanted to take with them.
The shoemaker said: "One must think further than one walks. I want to take bread with me for seven days." "What," said the tailor, "to carry bread on one's back for seven days like a beast of burden and not to look back? I cling to God and pay no attention to anything.
The money I have in my pocket is as good in summer as in winter, but the bread gets dry in the hot season and, on top of that, moldy.
My skirt doesn't reach any further than my ankles.
Why shouldn't we find the right way? Two days' bread and that's it." So everyone bought their bread and then they went into the forest on a whim.
In the forest it was as quiet as a church.
No wind blew, no stream rushed, no bird sang, and no ray of sunlight penetrated the thickly leafy branches.
The shoemaker did not say a word; the heavy bread pressed against his back so that sweat ran down his sullen and gloomy face.
The tailor, however, was quite cheerful, and ran along, whistling on a leaf or singing a little song, and thought: "God in heaven must be glad that I am so merry." This went on for two days, but on the third day, when the forest seemed to have no end and the tailor had eaten all his bread, his heart sank a little;
However, he did not lose courage, but relied on God and his luck.
On the third day he lay down hungry under a tree in the evening and got up hungry the next morning.
The same thing happened on the fourth day, and when the shoemaker sat down on a fallen tree and ate his meal, the tailor had no choice but to watch.
If he asked for a piece of bread, the other laughed scornfully and said, "You have always been so merry, you might as well try what happens when you are not merry: the birds that sing too early in the morning are attacked by the hawk in the evening." In short, he was without mercy.
But on the fifth morning the poor tailor could no longer get up and could hardly utter a word because of exhaustion;
his cheeks were white and his eyes red.
Then the shoemaker said to him: "I will give you a piece of bread today, but in return I will gouge out your right eye." The unfortunate tailor, who wanted to save his life, could not help himself: he wept once more with both eyes and then held them out, and the shoemaker, who had a heart of stone, gouged out his right eye with a sharp knife.
The tailor remembered what his mother had said to him when he had been nibbling in the pantry: "Eat as much as you like and suffer as much as you must." When he had eaten his dearly paid bread, he got back on his feet, forgot his misfortune and consoled himself with the fact that he could still see enough with one eye.
But on the sixth day hunger returned and almost consumed his heart.
He fell down by a tree in the evening, and on the seventh morning he could not get up because of exhaustion, and death was at his heels.
Then the shoemaker said, “I will show mercy and give you more bread;
You won't get it for free, I'll gouge out your other eye for it." Then the tailor recognized his frivolous life, asked God for forgiveness, and said, "Do what you must, I will suffer what I must;
But remember that our Lord does not judge every moment, and that another hour will come when the evil deed you have done to me, and which I have not deserved from you, will be repaid.
In good times I shared with you what I had.
My craft is such that stitch must drive out stitch.
If I no longer have eyes and can no longer sew, I will have to go begging.
If I am blind, do not leave me here alone, or I will perish." But the shoemaker, who had driven God out of his heart, took the knife and gouged out his left eye.
Then he gave him a piece of bread to eat;
handed him a stick and led him behind him.
When the sun went down, they came out of the forest, and in front of the forest in the field stood a gallows.
The shoemaker led the blind tailor there, then left him there and went his way.
From fatigue, pain and hunger, the unfortunate man fell asleep and slept the whole night.
When day dawned, he awoke, but did not know where he was.
Two poor sinners hung on the gallows, and a crow sat on the head of each.
Then one of them began to speak: "Brother, are you awake?" "Yes, I am awake," answered the second.
"Then I will tell you something," began the first, "the dew that fell upon us from the gallows last night will restore the eyes of anyone who washes himself with it.
If the blind knew that, how many people could regain their sight who don't believe that it is possible!" When the tailor heard that, he took his handkerchief, pressed it on the grass, and when it was moistened with dew, he washed his eye sockets with it.
Immediately what the hanged man had said came true, and a pair of fresh and healthy eyes filled the sockets.
It was not long before the tailor saw the sun rising from behind the mountains; before him in the plain lay the great royal city with its magnificent gates and a hundred towers, and the golden buttons and crosses that stood on the peaks began to glow.
He distinguished every leaf on the trees, saw the birds flying by and the mosquitoes dancing in the air.
He took a sewing needle from his pocket, and when he was able to thread the thread as well as he had ever been able to, his heart leapt for joy.
He fell on his knees, thanked God for the grace shown to him, and said his morning blessing;
He did not forget to pray for the poor sinners who hung there like the handle in the bell, and who were beaten against each other by the wind.
Then he took his bundle on his back, soon forgot the heartache he had endured and continued on his way, singing and whistling.
The first thing he encountered was a brown foal running freely in the field.
He grabbed it by the mane and wanted to swing himself up and ride into the city.
But the foal begged for his freedom: "I am still too young," he said, "even a light tailor like you can break my back; let me run until I am strong.
Perhaps a time will come when I can reward you." "Run over," said the tailor, "I see you are such a scamp too." He gave him another blow with the switch across the back, so that he kicked out his hind legs for joy, jumped over hedges and ditches, and ran into the field.
But the little tailor had not eaten anything since yesterday.
"The sun," he said, "fills my eyes, but bread does not fill my mouth.
The first thing I come across that is halfway edible will have to do.' At that moment a stork walked quite seriously across the meadow.
"Stop, stop," cried the tailor, seizing him by the leg, "I do not know whether you are worthy of eating, but my hunger will not allow me much choice; I must cut off your head and roast you." "Don't do that," answered the stork, "I am a sacred bird, to whom no one harms, and who is of great use to mankind.
If you let me live, I can repay you another time." "Then go away, Cousin Longlegs," said the tailor.
The stork rose, let his long legs hang and flew leisurely away.
»What will become of it?« said the tailor to himself, »my hunger is growing ever greater and my stomach ever emptier.
Whatever gets in my way now is lost.’ As he did so he saw a pair of young ducks swimming across a pond.
"You've come at just the right time," he said, grabbing one of them and trying to wring its neck.
Then an old duck, which was stuck in the reeds, began to screech loudly, swam towards him with its beak open and begged him imploringly to have pity on her dear children.
"Don't you think," she said, "how your mother would lament if someone wanted to take you away and finish you off?" "Just be quiet," said the good-natured tailor, "you shall keep your children," and put the prisoner back into the water.
When he turned around, he found himself in front of an old tree that was half hollow and saw the wild bees getting in and out.
"Here I shall find the reward for my good deed," said the tailor, "the honey will refresh me." But the queen bee came out, threatened and said, "If you touch my people and destroy my nest, our stings shall pierce your skin like ten thousand glowing needles.
But if you leave us alone and go your way, we will do you a service another time."
The little tailor saw that there was nothing to be done here either.
"Three dishes empty," he said, "and nothing on the fourth, that's a bad meal." So he dragged himself into town with his starving stomach, and as the lunch bell was just ringing, food had already been cooked for him in the inn and he could sit down at the table straight away.
When he was full, he said: "Now I want to work too." He went around the city, looking for a master and soon found good accommodation.
But since he had learned his trade from the ground up, it was not long before he became famous, and everyone wanted to have their new coat made by the little tailor.
Every day his reputation increased.
"I cannot make any progress in my art," he said, "and yet it improves every day." Finally the king appointed him his court tailor.
But that's how things go in the world.
On the same day, his former comrade, the shoemaker, had also become court shoemaker.
When he saw the tailor and saw that he had two healthy eyes again, his conscience tormented him.
"Before he takes revenge on me," he thought to himself, "I must dig a pit for him." But he who digs a pit for others will fall into it himself.
In the evening, when he had finished work and it was getting dark, he crept up to the king and said: "Lord King, the tailor is a haughty man and has presumed to bring back the golden crown which was lost in ancient times." "That would be good for me," said the king, and the next morning he summoned the tailor and ordered him to bring back the crown or leave the city forever.
“Oho,” thought the tailor, “a rogue gives more than he has.
If the grumpy king demands of me what no human being can do, then I will not wait until tomorrow, but will set out for the city again today." So he packed his bundle;
But when he was out of the gate, he was sorry that he should spend his fortune and look away from the city in which he had been so happy.
He came to the pond where he had made the acquaintance of the ducks, and there the old duck, to whom he had left her young, was sitting on the bank, cleaning herself with her beak.
She recognized him immediately and asked why he was hanging his head like that.
"You will not be surprised when you hear what has happened to me," answered the tailor and told her his fate.
"If that's all," said the duck, "we can find a solution.
The crown fell into the water and lies at the bottom; how quickly we brought it up again.
In the meantime, spread your handkerchief on the shore.' She dived under with her twelve young ones, and in five minutes she was back on the surface, sitting in the middle of the crown, which rested on her wings, and the twelve young ones swam all around her, with their beaks under them and helping to carry her.
They swam to shore and placed the crown on the cloth.
You would not believe how magnificent the crown was; when the sun shone on it, it glittered like a hundred thousand carbuncles.
The tailor tied his cloth together at the four corners and carried it to the king, who was overjoyed and hung a golden chain around the tailor's neck.
When the shoemaker saw that one trick had failed, he thought of a second, went before the king and said: "Lord King, the tailor has become so arrogant again, he dares to depict the whole royal palace, with everything in it, loose and fast, inside and out, in wax." The king sent for the tailor and ordered him to depict the whole royal palace, with everything in it, loose and fast, inside and out, in wax, and if he did not manage to do it, or if only one nail was missing from the wall, he should be imprisoned underground for the rest of his life.
The tailor thought, "Trouble always comes, no one can stand it," threw his bundle on his back and walked away.
When he came to the hollow tree, he sat down and hung his head.
The bees flew out and the queen asked him if he had a stiff neck because he was holding his head so crooked.
"Ah no," answered the tailor, "something else is bothering me," and he told what the king had asked of him.
The bees began to hum and buzz among themselves, and the queen said, "Just go back home, but come back tomorrow at this time and bring a large cloth with you, then everything will be fine." Then he turned back, but the bees flew straight into the open windows of the royal palace, crawled around in every corner and examined everything very carefully.
Then they ran back and recreated the castle in wax with such speed that it seemed to grow before one's eyes.
By the evening everything was ready, and when the tailor came the next morning the whole magnificent building was standing, and not a nail was missing from the wall and not a tile from the roof;
It was tender and snow-white and smelled sweet like honey.
The tailor carefully wrapped it in his cloth and brought it to the king, who could not get enough of the amazement and placed it in his largest hall and gave the tailor a large stone house in return!
But the shoemaker did not give up, went to the king for the third time and said: "Lord King, the tailor has heard that no water will spring from the castle courtyard, so he has dared to say that it should rise up in the middle of the courtyard as high as a man and be as bright as crystal." Then the king had the tailor brought and said: "If a stream of water does not spring up in my courtyard tomorrow, as you promised, the executioner in the same courtyard shall cut you down by a head." The poor tailor did not think twice and hurried out of the gate, and because this time his life was at stake, tears rolled down his cheeks.
As he walked along, full of grief, the foal to whom he had once given his freedom, and who had grown into a handsome brown horse, came bounding up.
"Now comes the hour," he said to him, "when I can repay you for your kindness.
I know what is wrong with you, but you will soon be helped. Just sit up, my back can carry two of you." The tailor's heart returned, he jumped up in one leap and the horse ran at full speed into the town and straight into the castle courtyard.
Then it ran around three times, fast as lightning, and on the third time it fell down.
But at that moment there was a terrible crash: a piece of earth in the middle of the courtyard burst into the air like a ball, and over the castle, and immediately behind it rose a jet of water as high as a man and a horse, and the water was as pure as crystal, and the sunbeams began to dance on it.
When the king saw this, he stood up in amazement, went and embraced the little tailor in front of everyone.
But the happiness did not last long.
The king had enough daughters, each one more beautiful than the other, but no son.
Then the wicked shoemaker went to the king for the fourth time and said: “Lord King, the tailor will not give up his arrogance.
Now he has presumed that if he wanted to, he could have a son brought to the king through the air." The king had the tailor called and said, "If you bring me a son within nine days, you shall have my eldest daughter as your wife." "The reward is certainly great," thought the little tailor, "and one would certainly do well, but the cherries hang too high for me. If I climb up to them, the branch will break beneath me and I will fall down." He went home, sat down cross-legged on his work table and considered what he should do.
"It's not possible," he finally cried out, "I want to go away, I can't live here in peace." He tied up his bundle and hurried out of the gate.
When he came to the meadows, he saw his old friend, the stork, who was walking up and down like a wise man, sometimes stopping to take a closer look at a frog and finally swallowing it.
The stork came and greeted him.
"I see," he began, "that you have your knapsack on your back; why do you want to leave the city?" The tailor told him what the king had asked of him and what he could not do, and lamented his misfortune.
»Don't worry about it,« said the stork, »I will help you out of your trouble.
I've been taking the babies into town for a long time now, so I can even fetch a little prince from the well.
Go home and keep quiet.
Today, nine days from now, go to the royal palace, and I will come there. The little tailor went home and was at the palace in good time.
Before long, the stork flew over and knocked on the window.
The tailor opened the door for him and Cousin Longlegs, stepped carefully in, and walked with grave steps across the smooth marble floor;
But he had a child in his beak that was as beautiful as an angel and was stretching out its little hands towards the queen.
He laid it on her lap, and she hugged and kissed it and was beside herself with joy.
Before flying away again, the stork took his travel bag from his shoulder and handed it to the queen.
There were bags inside with colorful sugar peas, which were distributed among the little princesses.
The eldest, however, received nothing, but married the merry tailor.
“It feels just as if I had won the big prize,” said the tailor.
My mother was right, she always said: 'If you trust in God and are lucky, you can't lack anything.
â¹«
The shoemaker had to make the shoes in which the little tailor danced at the wedding feast, after which he was ordered to leave the city forever.
The path to the forest led him to the gallows.
Tired of anger, rage and the heat of the day, he threw himself down.
When he closed his eyes and wanted to sleep, the two crows from the heads of the hanged men swooped down with loud cries and pecked out his eyes.
He ran senselessly into the forest and must have perished there, because no one ever saw him or heard from him again.
