53. Snow White
Once upon a time, in the middle of winter and the snowflakes were falling like feathers from the sky, a queen was sitting at a window that had a frame of black ebony and was sewing.
And as she was sewing and looked up at the snow, she pricked her finger with the needle and three drops of blood fell into the snow.
And because the red looked so beautiful in the white snow, she thought to herself: "If only I had a child as white as snow, as red as blood, and as black as the wood of the frame!" Soon afterward she had a little daughter who was as white as snow, as red as blood, and as black-haired as ebony, and was therefore called Snow White.
And when the child was born, the queen died.
After more than a year the king took another wife.
She was a beautiful woman, but she was proud and arrogant and could not bear to be surpassed in beauty by anyone.
She had a wonderful mirror, when she stood in front of it and looked at herself in it, she said:
"Mirror Mirror on the wall,
Who's the fairest of them all?"
The mirror replied:
»Queen, you are the most beautiful in the land«
Then she was satisfied because she knew that the mirror told the truth.
But Snow White grew up and became more and more beautiful, and when she was seven years old she was as beautiful as the clear day and more beautiful than the queen herself.
When she once asked her mirror:
"Mirror Mirror on the wall,
Who's the fairest of them all?"
he replied:
»Queen, you are the most beautiful here,
but Snow White is a thousand times more beautiful than you"
The queen was frightened and turned yellow and green with envy.
From that moment on, whenever she saw Snow White, her heart turned within her, she hated the girl so much.
And envy and arrogance grew like weeds in her heart, so that she had no peace day or night.
Then she called a huntsman and said: "Take the child out into the forest, I do not want to see it again.
You shall kill her, and bring me her lungs and liver as a token." The huntsman obeyed and led her out, and when he had drawn his hunting knife and was about to pierce Snow White's innocent heart, she began to cry and said: "Ah, dear huntsman, let me live;
I will run into the wild forest and never come home again." And because it was so beautiful, the huntsman took pity on it and said, "Then run away, you poor child." "The wild animals will soon have devoured you," he thought, and yet it was as if a stone had been rolled from his heart because he did not have to kill it.
And when a young piglet came bounding along, he stabbed it, took out its lungs and liver and brought them as a token to the queen.
The cook had to boil them in salt, and the wicked woman ate them and thought she had eaten Snow White's lungs and liver.
Now the poor child was all alone in the great forest, and was so frightened that he looked at all the leaves on the trees and did not know how to help himself.
Then it began to run and ran over the sharp stones and through the thorns and the wild animals jumped past it, but they did not harm it.
It ran as long as its feet could carry it until it was almost evening, then it saw a small house and went inside to rest.
Everything in the little house was small, but so neat and clean that it cannot be described.
There stood a white-covered table with seven small plates, each plate with its own spoon, as well as seven little knives and forks and seven little cups.
Seven little beds were placed next to each other against the wall and covered with snow-white sheets.
Snow White, because she was so hungry and thirsty, ate a little vegetables and bread from each plate, and drank a drop of wine from each cup;
because it didn't want to take everything away from one person alone.
Afterwards, because it was so tired, it lay down in a bed, but none of them fit;
one was too long, the other too short, until finally the seventh was right;
and there it remained, commended itself to God and fell asleep.
When it had become completely dark, the masters of the little house came; they were the seven dwarves who were hacking and digging for ore in the mountains.
They lit their seven little candles, and when it became light in the little house, they saw that someone had been in there, for everything was not in the order in which they had left it.
The first said, "Who has been sitting on my little chair?" The second, "Who has been eating from my little plate?" The third, "Who has been taking from my bread roll?" The fourth, "Who has been eating from my vegetables?" The fifth, "Who has been stabbing with my little fork?" The sixth, "Who has been cutting with my little knife?" The seventh, "Who has been drinking from my little cup?" Then the first looked around and saw that there was a little hole in his bed, and he said, "Who has been stepping into my little bed?" The others came running and cried, "Someone has been lying in mine too." But the seventh, when he looked into his bed, saw Snow White lying in it and sleeping.
Then he called the others, who came running and cried out in amazement, fetched their seven little candles and shone them on Snow White.
"Oh, my God! Oh, my God!" they cried, "how beautiful the child is!" and they were so happy that they did not wake her, but let her sleep in her little bed.
But the seventh dwarf slept with his companions, each for an hour, and the night was over.
When it was morning, Snow White woke up and when she saw the seven dwarfs she was frightened.
But they were friendly and asked: "What is your name?" "My name is Snow White," she answered.
“How did you get into our house?” the dwarves continued.
Then she told them that her stepmother had wanted to have her killed, but the huntsman had spared her life, and she had run all day until she had finally found her little house.
The dwarves said: "If you will take care of our household, cook, make the beds, wash, sew, and knit, and keep everything neat and clean, then you can stay with us and you shall want for nothing." "Yes," said Snow White, "with all my heart," and stayed with them.
It kept their house in order;
In the morning they went into the mountains and looked for ore and gold, in the evening they came back and their food had to be ready.
The girl was alone during the day, and the good little dwarfs warned her and said, "Beware of your stepmother, she will soon know that you are here;
don't let anyone in"
But the queen, after she thought she had eaten Snow White's lungs and liver, thought that she was once again the first and most beautiful, and stepped before the mirror and said:
"Mirror Mirror on the wall,
Who's the fairest of them all?"
The mirror replied:
»Queen, you are the most beautiful here,
but Snow White over the mountains
with the seven dwarves
is a thousand times more beautiful than you«
Then she was frightened, for she knew that the mirror was not telling an untruth, and she realized that the huntsman had deceived her and that Snow White was still alive.
And then she thought and thought again how she would kill it;
For as long as she was not the most beautiful in the whole land, envy gave her no peace.
And when she finally thought of something, she colored her face and dressed like an old shopkeeper and was quite unrecognizable.
In this guise she went over the seven mountains to the seven dwarfs, knocked at the door and called: "Fine wares for sale! for sale!" Snow White looked out of the window and called: "Good day, dear lady, what have you to sell?" "Fine wares, fine wares," she answered, "laces of all colors," and brought out one that was woven from brightly colored silk.
"I can let the honest woman in," thought Snow White, unlocked the door, and bought herself the pretty shoelace.
"Child," said the old woman, "how you look! Come, I will lace you up properly." Snow White had no suspicions, stood before her and let herself be laced up with the new laces;
But the old woman tied it quickly and so tightly that Snow White lost her breath and fell down as if dead.
"Now you were the most beautiful," she said and hurried out.
Not long afterwards, in the evening, the seven dwarfs came home, but how frightened they were when they saw their dear Snow White lying on the ground;
and it did not move or stir, as if it were dead.
They lifted it up, and seeing that it was laced too tightly, they cut the lace in two;
then it began to breathe a little, and gradually came back to life.
When the dwarves heard what had happened, they said: 'The old shopkeeper's wife was none other than the wicked queen;
Be careful and don’t let anyone in when we are not with you.
But the wicked woman, when she came home, went to the mirror and asked:
"Mirror Mirror on the wall,
Who's the fairest of them all?"
Then he answered as usual:
Madam Queen, you are the most beautiful here,
but Snow White over the mountains
with the seven dwarves
is a thousand times more beautiful than you«
When she heard this, the blood rushed to her heart, and she was so frightened, for she saw that Snow White had come to life again.
"But now," said she, "I will devise something that shall ruin you," and with the witchcraft that she knew she made a poisonous comb.
Then she disguised herself and took on the form of another old woman.
So she went over the seven mountains to the seven dwarfs, knocked at the door and called: "Good goods for sale! for sale!" Snow White looked out and said: "Just go on, I'm not allowed to let anyone in." "You are allowed to look," said the old woman, pulled out the poisonous comb and held it up.
The child liked him so much that he let himself be deceived and opened the door.
When they had agreed on the purchase, the old woman said, "Now I will comb your hair properly." Poor Snow White thought nothing of it and let the old woman do as she pleased, but she had hardly put the comb in her hair when the poison took effect and the girl fell down unconscious.
"You paragon of beauty," said the wicked woman, "now it is all over for you," and went away.
Fortunately, it was soon evening when the seven little dwarves came home.
When they saw Snow White lying on the ground as if dead, they immediately suspected her stepmother, searched for her and found the poisonous comb, and no sooner had they pulled it out than Snow White came to and told what had happened.
Then they warned him again to be on his guard and not to open the door to anyone.
The queen stood in front of the mirror at home and said:
"Mirror Mirror on the wall,
Who's the fairest of them all?"
Then he answered as before:
»Queen, you are the most beautiful here,
but Snow White over the mountains
with the seven dwarves
is a thousand times more beautiful than you«
When she heard the mirror speak like that, she trembled and shook with anger.
"Snow White shall die," she cried, "even if it costs me my own life." Then she went into a very hidden, lonely room where no one came, and there she made a poisonous apple.
On the outside it looked beautiful, white, with red cheeks, so that everyone who saw it wanted it, but whoever ate a piece of it had to die.
When the apple was ready, she colored her face and disguised herself as a farmer's wife, and so she went over the seven mountains to the seven dwarves.
She knocked, Snow White stuck her head out of the window and said: "I mustn't let anyone in, the seven dwarfs have forbidden me to." "That's fine with me," answered the farmer's wife, "I'll get rid of my apples soon enough.
Here, I will give you one." "No," said Snow White, "I must not accept anything." "Are you afraid of poison?" said the old woman. "Look, I'll cut the apple in two pieces: you eat the red cheek, and I will eat the white one." But the apple had been made so artificially that only the red cheek was poisoned.
Snow White lusted after the beautiful apple, and when she saw that the farmer's wife was eating it, she could no longer resist, stretched out her hand and took the poisonous half.
But as soon as it had a bite of it in its mouth, it fell dead to the ground.
Then the queen looked at it with gruesome eyes and laughed loudly and said: "White as snow, red as blood, black as ebony! This time the dwarves cannot awaken you again." And when she asked the mirror at home:
"Mirror Mirror on the wall,
Who's the fairest of them all?"
so he finally answered:
»Queen, you are the most beautiful in the land«
Then her jealous heart found peace, as much as a jealous heart can find peace.
When the little dwarves came home in the evening, they found Snow White lying on the ground, and no breath came out of her mouth, and she was dead.
They picked it up, looked to see if they could find anything poisonous, untied it, combed its hair, washed it with water and wine, but nothing helped;
the dear child was dead and remained dead.
They laid it on a bier, and all seven of them sat down by it, and wept over it, and wept for three days.
Then they wanted to bury it, but it still looked as fresh as a living person and still had its beautiful red cheeks.
They said, "We cannot bury her in the black earth," and had a transparent coffin made of glass, so that she could be seen from all sides; they laid her in it, and wrote her name on it in golden letters, and that she was a king's daughter.
Then they put the coffin out on the mountain, and one of them always stayed there and guarded it.
And the animals also came and mourned Snow White, first an owl, then a raven, and finally a dove.
Now Snow White lay in the coffin for a long, long time and did not decay, but looked as if she were sleeping, for she was still as white as snow, as red as blood, and as black-haired as ebony.
But it happened that a king's son got into the forest and came to the dwarf's house to spend the night there.
He saw the coffin on the mountain and the beautiful Snow White in it, and read what was written on it in golden letters.
Then he said to the dwarves, "Leave the coffin with me, and I will give you whatever you want for it." But the dwarves answered, "We wouldn't give it for all the gold in the world." Then he said, "Then give it to me, for I cannot live without seeing Snow White; I will honor and respect her as my dearest." As he spoke thus, the good little dwarves felt pity for him and gave him the coffin.
The prince then had his servants carry him away on their shoulders.
Then it happened that they stumbled over a bush, and the shock caused the poisonous apple pulp that Snow White had bitten off to come out of her throat.
And not long after, it opened its eyes, lifted the lid of the coffin, and sat up and was alive again.
“Oh God, where am I?” it cried.
The king's son said full of joy, "You are with me," and related what had happened, and said, "I love you more than anything in the world;
Come with me to my father's castle, you shall be my wife." Then Snow White was kind to him and went with him, and their wedding was arranged with great splendor and magnificence.
Snow White’s godless stepmother was also invited to the party.
When she had dressed herself in beautiful clothes, she stood in front of the mirror and said:
Mirror Mirror on the wall,
Who's the fairest of them all?"
The mirror replied:
»Queen, you are the most beautiful here,
but the young queen is a thousand times more beautiful than you"
Then the wicked woman uttered a curse and became so frightened that she did not know what to do.
At first she didn’t want to come to the wedding;
But she couldn't rest; she had to go and see the young queen.
And when she went in, she recognized Snow White, and in fear and terror she stood there and could not move.
But iron slippers had already been placed over coal fires and were carried in with tongs and placed before her.
Then she had to step into the red-hot shoes and dance until she fell dead to the ground.
