Many hundreds of years ago, rats and mice in the town of Hamelin multiplied so much that the dogs and cats were unable to destroy them all.
They fell upon them with murderous intent and bit them to death by the thousands; the inhabitants also armed themselves with sticks and attacked them incessantly, but the more of the grey fellows they killed, the more there were; then the cats and dogs, which had long since bitten their teeth blunt, lost their courage, the people threw away the sticks and left the field to the long-tailed ones.
Now, one should have seen what a swarm of rats was developing in Hamelin; from the cellar to the attic, all the rooms were full, yes, they were scurrying in whole hordes over the roofs and making themselves so widespread in the streets that the people of Hamelin no longer knew whether they or the rats were in charge.
It was indeed quite terrible to live in Hamelin.
When the housewife wanted to take butter out of the pot, a few ugly rats jumped out at her; they grazed in the vegetable bins by the dozen; potatoes, turnips, cabbage and everything that could be eaten disappeared in the blink of an eye.
When the housemates sat at the table, the rats climbed up their clothes, jumped into the bowls and ate what they found.
Eventually it got to the point where no one could lie down to sleep or they were in danger of being eaten.
Then the people ran to the town hall, howling and moaning, and demanded that the magistrate free them from the terrible plague.
The councillors, however, were themselves in dire straits and had to station a few town soldiers in the hall, who hacked at the rats with naked sabres.
Finally they came up with a good idea and announced that they would give a large reward in money and property to anyone who could rid them of the rats and mice.
After some time, a stranger who was dressed very strangely reported to the town hall.
His feet were in lace-up shoes, his trousers were tight, his short coat with the collar over it was belted in the middle, a bundle hung at his side, on his head he wore a floppy cap with a feather, and in his hands he held a clarinet.
“You wise gentlemen,” he said to the magistrate, “I have come here from a distant land to drive away the vermin.
If you give me what you promised, no mouse or rat will remain in Hamelin.
"The gentlemen of the council extended their hand to him and, in their distress, promised him even more than they had promised in the appeal.
Then the stranger made a happy face, stood on the high steps of the town hall and whistled a very strange tune on his clarinet.
The first note had hardly been uttered when all the rats and mice that were in the town hall rushed out of the doors and windows and gathered around him.
The Pied Piper now set off whistling and went through all the streets.
The number of long-tails following him grew ever larger, and there was no house in Hamelin in which there was still a mouse or a rat.
Whistling, he went outside the city, where he turned around and looked, laughing, at the grey, swarming crowd that was fighting with each other to be close to him.
But then he put his clarinet to his mouth and played an even stranger tune.
Continuing forward, he reached the banks of the Weser.
Without thinking, he walked into the stream, still whistling, and the rats and mice followed him, as if seized by a mad spell.
The water carried him like a rubber ball, no matter how far he might step back and forth on it.
But the rats and mice sank in the flood, not a tail was seen anymore.
Then he took his clarinet under his arm and went to the shore, where the people of Hamelin stood by the thousands and gratefully extended their hands to him.
They celebrated him with dances and banquets and called him their savior from all distress.
But when he demanded his reward, the magistrate told him to come back in a year and a day, then he would have everything they had promised him.
The Pied Piper went on his way, and the Hamelers enjoyed peace from then on.
When the year and the day were over, he returned and once again demanded his reward.
The magistrate initially held him back with all sorts of empty excuses, and finally even refused to give him the promised money and property.
The Pied Piper became angry and threatened severe revenge.
But the councillors laughed at him and said that he lacked the power to.
When the Pied Piper saw that he could not get his rights in a fair way, he stood in the market and called out: "Now I will whistle you a little piece that you will never forget for the rest of your life.
"He put his clarinet to his mouth and began to play a very peculiar tune.
As soon as the strange sounds rang out, children ran from all the houses, lifted their feet to dance and hopped after him; there were small and large ones, those who ran alone and those who had to be led by the hand.
They followed him with loud cheers to the Dome Mountain.
He parted, and the man and the children went in.
As soon as they were all inside, the dome mountain closed again.
Only one child, who could not keep up so quickly, was spared and told in Hamelin what misfortune had happened.
But the Pied Piper led the children through the earth to Transylvania, where they all settled down.
The inhabitants of Hamelin would now have liked to give the promised reward, but it was too late.
